[RF-DOCS]Active Record Associations Guide [ci-skip] (#52523)
rails/rails: guides/source/association_basics.md

After reading this guide, you will know how to:

* Understand the various types of associations.
* Declare associations between Active Record models.
* Choose the right association type for your models.
* Use Single Table Inheritance.
* Setting up and using Delegated Types.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Associations Overview
-----------------

_Associations_ in Rails are special macro style calls that make it easy to
connect different models. You can use them to tell Rails how your models relate
to each other, which helps you manage your data more effectively, and makes
common operations simpler and easier to read.

INFO: A macro-style call is a method that generates or modifies other methods at
runtime, allowing for concise and expressive declarations of functionality, such
as defining model associations in Rails. For example, `has_many :comments`.

When you set up an association, you instruct Rails to maintain the [Primary
Key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_key) and [Foreign
Key](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foreign_key) information between instances of

> the two models, ensuring that your data stays consistent and properly linked.

Reviewer: Perhaps pedantic but the foreign key and primary key information is maintained by the database that Rails can set up.

This makes it easy to keep track of which records are related. It also adds
useful methods to your models so you can work with related data more easily.

Consider a simple Rails application with models for authors and books.

### Without Associations

Without associations, creating and deleting books for that author would require
a tedious and manual process. Here's what that would look like:

```ruby
class CreateAuthors < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    create_table :authors do |t|
      t.string :name
      t.timestamps
    end

    create_table :books do |t|

>       t.belongs_to :author

Reviewer: You may want to use its alias `t.references` to avoid possible confusion with `belongs_to` in ActiveRecord classes.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention somewhere that these are aliases?

Reviewer 2: Also, whatever we pick, let's keep it consistent throughout the page.

Author: > Should we mention somewhere that these are aliases?

Since this is related to Active Record Migrations, folks will refer to that guide to learn more about migrations and [we mention that `belongs_to` is an alias there. ](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_migrations.html#creating-associations)

Author: > You may want to use its alias t.references to avoid possible confusion with belongs_to in ActiveRecord classes.

I think that the `belongs_to` alias is explicit and makes the migrations easier to read, however, I see your point about possible confusion here and so I've changed it to references but I hope that it's not misleading. 

> Also, whatever we pick, let's keep it consistent throughout the page.

@MatheusRich - my ears perk up when folks say we should keep it consistent because I agree wholeheartedly! In this case, I've used `t.belongs_to` in all the scenarios except the one that @rizwanreza pointed out because even though we can use the alias in this case, I agree that it may cause confusion.

After reading this guide, you will know how to:

* Understand the various types of associations.
* Declare associations between Active Record models.
* Choose the right association type for your models.
* Use Single Table Inheritance.
* Setting up and using Delegated Types.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Associations Overview
-----------------

> _Associations_ in Rails are special macro style calls that make it easy to
> connect different models. You can use them to tell Rails how your models relate
> to each other, which helps you manage your data more effectively, and makes
> common operations simpler and easier to read.

Reviewer 3: Final nitpick...

The Migrations, Callbacks and Active Record Basics guides talk about "Active Record Migration", "Active Record Callbacks" and "Active Record Associations" instead of "Rails Associations". Rails doesn't support other types of associations but would it be clearer to stick to "Active Record Associations" here as well?

Also can we avoid "macro style calls" in the opening sentence? 😄

Maybe something like:
```suggestion
Active Record associations allow you to define relationships between models.
_Associations_ are implemented as special macro style calls that make it easy to tell Rails how your models relate
to each other, which helps you manage your data more effectively, and makes
common operations simpler and easier to read.
```

@author.destroy
```

### Using Associations

However, with associations, we can streamline these operations, as well as

> others, by explicitly informing Rails about the connection between the two

Author: Makes sense! I've updated the necessary instances. I've only kept those that reference the API doc.

end
```

When used alone, `belongs_to` produces a one-directional one-to-one connection.
Therefore each book in the above example "knows" its author, but the authors
don't know about their books. To setup a [bi-directional
association](#bi-directional-associations) - use `belongs_to` in combination
with a `has_one` or `has_many` on the other model, in this case the Author
model.

> NOTE: By default `belongs_to` validates the presence of the association to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: By default `belongs_to` validates the presence of the associated record to
```

end
```

> This ensures that even if `optional: true` allows `author_id` to be NULL, when
> it is not NULL, it must point to a valid record in the authors table.

Reviewer 2: I found this sentence a bit hard to parse at first. Here's an attempt at a rewrite:

```suggestion
This ensures that even if `optional: true` is set, allowing `author_id` to be NULL, when
it the value is not NULL, it must point to a valid record in the authors table.
```

Author: Thanks @MatheusRich, there was a typo in the suggested text, but I used a variation of it to make it easier to read ✨

#### Methods Added by `belongs_to`

In database terms, the `belongs_to` association says that this model's table
contains a column which represents a reference to another table. This can be

> used to set up one-to-one or one-to-many relations, depending on the setup. If
> the table of the other class contains the reference in a one-to-one relation,
> then you should use `has_one` instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
used to set up one-to-one or one-to-many relations, depending on the setup. Howerver, if
the table _of the other class_ is the one containing the reference in a one-to-one relation,
then you should use `has_one` instead.
```

Reviewer 2: I like this clarification about the difference between `has_one` and `belongs_to` (a classic beginner question), but it feels out of place in this subsection.

Author: Nice catch! I agree, I've gone through all the sections and moved the opening paragraph to after I introduce the migration for the association :)

When you declare a `belongs_to` association, the declaring class automatically

> gains numerous methods related to the association. Some of these include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gains numerous methods related to the association. Some of these are:
```

Author: Updated this sentence for all of the association method sections, better readability -thanks!

setting this object's foreign key to the same value.

```ruby
@book.author = @author
```

The `build_association` method returns a new object of the associated type. This
object will be instantiated from the passed attributes, and the link through
this object's foreign key will be set, but the associated object will _not_ yet
be saved.

```ruby
@author = @book.build_author(author_number: 123,
                             author_name: "John Doe")
```

The `create_association` method takes it a step further and also saves the
associated object once it passes all of the validations specified on the
associated model.

```ruby
@author = @book.create_author(author_number: 123,
                              author_name: "John Doe")
```

Finally, `create_association!` does the same, but raises
`ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid` if the record is invalid.

```ruby
# This will raise ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid because the name is blank
begin
  @book.create_author!(author_number: 123, name: "")
rescue ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid => e
  puts e.message
end
```

```irb
irb> raise_validation_error: Validation failed: Name can't be blank (ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid)
```

> ##### Checking for Association Changes

Reviewer 2: Do you think it's worth mentioning that `model.association_changed?` and `model.association.changed?` are different? The first one tracks if there's a new record, while the second one tracks if some attribute in the association changed. If we add this note, _maybe_ it is worth also mentioning that this is backed by `ActiveModel::Dirty`

Author: Sounds good! I've added a note to the bottom:

```
NOTE: Do not confuse `model.association_changed?` with
`model.association.changed?`. The former checks if the association has been
replaced with a new record, while the latter tracks changes to the attributes of
the association.
```

However, I've chosen not to mention `ActiveModel::Dirty` as I think its more relevant to the ActiveModel section and we don't need to go into details here.

begin
  @supplier.create_account!(terms: "")
rescue ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid => e
  puts e.message
end
```

```irb
irb> raise_validation_error: Validation failed: Terms can't be blank (ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid)
```

##### Checking for Existing Associations

You can see if any associated objects exist by using the `association.nil?`
method:

```ruby
if @supplier.account.nil?
  @msg = "No account found for this supplier"
end
```

##### Saving Behavior of Associated Objects

When you assign an object to a `has_one` association, that object is
automatically saved (in order to update its foreign key). In addition, any
object being replaced is also automatically saved, because its foreign key will
change too.

If either of these saves fails due to validation errors, then the assignment
statement returns `false` and the assignment itself is cancelled.

If the parent object (the one declaring the `has_one` association) is unsaved
(that is, `new_record?` returns `true`) then the child objects are not saved.
They will automatically when the parent object is saved.

If you want to assign an object to a `has_one` association without saving the

> object, use the `build_association` method.

Author: Yeah, I think it's useful - done  ☑️

`employees` table. This column references the `id` of another employee (the
manager).

```ruby
class CreateEmployees < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    create_table :employees do |t|
      # Add a reference to the manager, which is an employee.
      t.references :manager, foreign_key: { to_table: :employees }
      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

- `t.references :manager` adds a `manager_id` column to the `employees` table.
- `foreign_key: { to_table: :employees }` ensures that the `manager_id` column
  references the `id` column of the `employees` table.

NOTE: The `to_table` option passed to `foreign_key` and more are explained in
[`SchemaStatements#add_reference`][connection.add_reference].

With this setup, you can easily access an employee's subordinates and manager in
your Rails application.

To get an employee's subordinates:

```ruby
employee = Employee.find(1)
subordinates = employee.subordinates
```

To get an employee's manager:

```ruby
manager = employee.manager
```

[connection.add_reference]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements.html#method-i-add_reference

> Single Table Inheritance (STI)

Reviewer 4: I think it would be useful to mention that STI breaks referential integrity.

you might encounter an [`ActiveRecord::SubclassNotFound`][] error.

To disable STI, you can set the [inheritance_column][] to `nil`.

```ruby
# Schema: vehicles[ id, type, created_at, updated_at ]
class Vehicle < ApplicationRecord
  self.inheritance_column = nil
end

Vehicle.create!(type: "Car")
# => #<Vehicle type: "Car", color: "Red", price: 10000>
```

In this configuration, Rails will treat the type column as a normal attribute
and will not use it for STI purposes. This is useful if you need to work with a
legacy schema that does not follow the STI pattern.

These adjustments provide flexibility when integrating Rails with existing
databases or when specific customization is required for your models.

[inheritance_column]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/ModelSchema.html#method-c-inheritance_column
[`ActiveRecord::SubclassNotFound`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/SubclassNotFound.html

Delegated Types
----------------

[`Single Table Inheritance (STI)`](#single-table-inheritance-sti) works best
when there is little difference between subclasses and their attributes, but it
includes all attributes of all subclasses in a single table.

> The disadvantage of this approach is that it can result in table bloat, as the

Reviewer 4: It would be helpful to mention the lack of referential integrity as another disadvantage.

Author: @mstroming thanks - I've added a [considerations section](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/2a8a870deb4b79cb310619fdc304d89e9e462a3d/guides/source/association_basics.md#considerations) to STI to maintain referential integrity.

[`collection.delete`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Associations/CollectionProxy.html#method-i-delete
[`collection.destroy`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Associations/CollectionProxy.html#method-i-destroy
[`collection.empty?`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Associations/CollectionProxy.html#method-i-empty-3F
[`collection.exists?`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/FinderMethods.html#method-i-exists-3F
[`collection.find`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Associations/CollectionProxy.html#method-i-find
[`collection.reload`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Associations/CollectionProxy.html#method-i-reload
[`collection.size`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Associations/CollectionProxy.html#method-i-size
[`collection.where`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/QueryMethods.html#method-i-where

##### `collection`

The `collection` method returns a Relation of all of the associated objects. If
there are no associated objects, it returns an empty Relation.

```ruby
@books = @author.books
```

> ##### `collection<<(object, ...)`

Reviewer 3: Could we group some of these methods by their use-case? Similar to `belongs_to` and `has_one`?

##### Querying the Association
    collection
    collection_singular_ids
    collection_singular_ids=(ids)
    collection.empty?
    collection.size
    collection.find(...)
    collection.where(...)
    collection.exists?(...)

##### Modifying the Association
    collection<<(object, ...)
    collection=(objects)
    collection.build(attributes = {})
    collection.create(attributes = {})
    collection.create!(attributes = {})
    collection.delete(object, ...)
    collection.destroy(object, ...)
    collection.clear
    collection.reload

Same thing applies to the `has_many :through` association.

Author: ✅

model:

```ruby
class CreatePictures < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    create_table :pictures do |t|
      t.string  :name
      t.bigint  :imageable_id
      t.string  :imageable_type
      t.timestamps
    end

    add_index :pictures, [:imageable_type, :imageable_id]
  end
end
```

In our example, `imageable_id` could be the ID of either an `Employee` or a
`Product`, and `imageable_type` is the name of the associated model's class, so
either `Employee` or `Product`.

While creating the polymorphic association manually is acceptable, it is instead
recommended to use `t.references` or its alias `t.belong_to` and specify
`polymorphic: true` so that Rails knows that the association is polymorphic, and
it automatically adds both the foreign key and type columns to the table.

```ruby
class CreatePictures < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    create_table :pictures do |t|
      t.string :name
      t.belongs_to :imageable, polymorphic: true
      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
```

Since polymorphic associations rely on storing class names in the database, that
data must remain synchronized with the class name used by the Ruby code. When

> renaming a class, make sure to update the data in the polymorphic type column.

Author: Yes, I think so, thanks!

For example, if you change the class name from `Product` to `Item` then you'd
need to run a migration script to update the `imageable_type` column in the
`pictures` table (or whichever table is affected) with the new class name.
Additionally, you'll need to update any other references to the class name
throughout your application code to reflect the change.

> ### Models with Composite Primary Keys

Author: Done, since I spent time on the "Models with Composite Primary Keys", I updated the section in [active_record_composite_primary_keys#associations-between-models-with-composite-primary-keys](https://249b34bc.rails-docs-preview.pages.dev/guides/active_record_composite_primary_keys#associations-between-models-with-composite-primary-keys) with the changes and I referenced the section from the associations guide.

A disadvantage of this approach is that it can result in table bloat, as the
table will include attributes specific to each subclass, even if they aren't
used by others.

Additionally, if you’re using [polymorphic
associations](#polymorphic-associations), where a model can belong to more than
one other model via a type and an ID, it could become complex to maintain
referential integrity because the association logic must handle different types
correctly.

Finally, if you have specific data integrity checks or validations that differ
between subclasses, you need to ensure these are correctly handled by Rails or
the database, especially when setting up foreign key constraints.

Delegated Types
----------------

Delegated types solves the [`Single Table Inheritance
(STI)`](#single-table-inheritance-sti) problem of table bloat via
`delegated_type`. This approach allows us to store shared attributes in a
superclass table and have separate tables for subclass-specific attributes.

### Setting up Delegated Types

To use delegated types, we need to model our data as follows:

* There is a superclass that stores shared attributes among all subclasses in
  its table.

> * Each subclass must inherit from the super class, and will have a separate

Author: Really good catch, it seems that the correct terms are "superclass" and "subclass". Will update all occurrences!

:through`](#has-many-through) and
[`has_and_belongs_to_many`](#has-and-belongs-to-many) associations. You can read
more about when to use a `has_many :through vs has_and_belongs_to_many` [in the
has many through vs has and belongs to many
section](#has-many-through-vs-has-and-belongs-to-many).

#### Creating Foreign Keys for `belongs_to` Associations

When you declare a [`belongs_to` association](#belongs-to), you need to create
foreign keys as appropriate. For example, consider this model:

```ruby
class Book < ApplicationRecord
  belongs_to :author
end
```

This declaration needs to be backed up by a corresponding foreign key column in
the books table. For a brand new table, the migration might look something like
this:

```ruby
class CreateBooks < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    create_table :books do |t|
      t.datetime   :published_at
      t.string     :book_number
      t.belongs_to :author
    end
  end
end
```

Whereas for an existing table, it might look like this:

```ruby
class AddAuthorToBooks < ActiveRecord::Migration[7.2]
  def change
    add_reference :books, :author
  end
end
```

> #### Creating Join Tables for `has_and_belongs_to_many` Associations

Author: I like that we have this section in the association guides because it's very specific to the relationship and makes it clear that you need the right schema. It’s also easy to see what needs to be done, and everything is in one place. I added a link to the [Active Record Migrations Guides](https://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_migrations.html#creating-a-join-table) so people can dive deeper into creating a join table. But I’d like to keep this section here too, unless you feel really strongly about removing it, then I can?

> #### Creating Join Tables for `has_and_belongs_to_many` Associations

Reviewer 3: That makes sense. If we are keeping this section, I think the following warning about model precedence in table naming should probably be moved to the migration guide.
I think it's too detailed for this section and it isn't mentioned in the migrations guide.

The warning is a bit unclear as well with the lexical scope ordering, while we mention alphabetical ordering elsewhere.

> #### Creating Join Tables for `has_and_belongs_to_many` Associations

Author: Totally agree. I had [moved the warning to the migrations docs yesterday and changed the term in active record migrations to lexical which seems more accurate based on the warning](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/52523/commits/4d45a7e593f2a88167b2efe99973063c4575eca1) but I'd missed removing the warning from here, which was my intention. Removing it now.

> #### Creating Join Tables for `has_and_belongs_to_many` Associations

Author: Oh wait, no I did actually remove it already ( I was looking at my active record validations branch), here's the [commit](https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/52523/commits/4d45a7e593f2a88167b2efe99973063c4575eca1)

> #### Creating Join Tables for `has_and_belongs_to_many` Associations

Reviewer 3: I've created a PR the add more sorting examples the the API docs:
https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/52766

> #### Creating Join Tables for `has_and_belongs_to_many` Associations

Reviewer 3: Ah nevermind. You already made the changes 🙃

> #### Creating Join Tables for `has_and_belongs_to_many` Associations

Reviewer 3: This is looking great! I'll have a last quick scan through the whole guide later today and I'll merge it.

> #### Creating Join Tables for `has_and_belongs_to_many` Associations

Author: Thank you so much!

If you create a `has_and_belongs_to_many` association, you need to explicitly
create the join table. Unless the name of the join table is explicitly specified
by using the `:join_table` option, Active Record creates the name by using the
lexical order of the class names. So a join between author and book models will
give the default join table name of "authors_books" because "a" outranks "b" in
lexical ordering.

WARNING: The precedence between model names is calculated using the `<=>`
operator for `String`. This means that if the strings are of different lengths,
and the strings are equal when compared up to the shortest length, then the
longer string is considered of higher lexical precedence than the shorter one.
For example, one would expect the tables "paper_boxes" and "papers" to generate
a join table name of "papers_paper_boxes" because of the length of the name
"paper_boxes", but it in fact generates a join table name of
"paper_boxes_papers" (because the underscore '\_' is lexicographically _less_

> than 's' in common encodings).

Reviewer 3: This warning probably makes more sense in the migrations guide.

Author: Agreed its too much detail for here - Moved it to the relevant section in migrations.

end
```

NOTE: Rails does not create foreign key columns for you. You need to explicitly
define them in your migrations.

#### `:primary_key`

By default, Rails uses the `id` column as the primary key for its tables. The
`:primary_key` option allows you to specify a different column as the primary
key.

For example, if the `users` table uses `guid` as the primary key instead of
`id`, and you want the `todos` table to reference `guid` as a foreign key
(`user_id`), you can configure it like this:

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  self.primary_key = 'guid' # Sets the primary key to guid instead of id
end

class Todo < ApplicationRecord
  belongs_to :user, primary_key: 'guid' # References the guid column in users table
end
```

When you execute `@user.todos.create`, the `@todo` record will have its
`user_id` value set to the `guid` value of `@user`.

`has_and_belongs_to_many` does not support the `:primary_key` option. For this
type of association, you can achieve similar functionality by using a join table
with has_many `:through` association, which gives more flexibility and supports
the `:primary_key` option. You can read more about this in the [`has_many

> :through` section](#has-many-through).

Reviewer 3: This is formatted a bit strangely. Not sure how to fix it:
<img width="829" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1f420071-bb7e-4301-a644-a1a42f407610">

Author: Fixed 3 instances ✅
<img width="855" alt="Screenshot 2024-09-01 at 22 41 56" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8cda4944-43ff-40e8-b52f-c4634fd88d78">

Reviewer 3: Nice!
